[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Robert Fliedner had pretty much decided that the Army didn't want him after his high school graduation in 1940.
You see, he had tried to enlist twice, but poor eyesight disqualified him both times.
But then after the U.S.
got involved in World War II, after Pearl Harbor, well, his eyesight must have improved because he was drafted first to sign the limited service and then general service and then to duty in both the European and Pacific theaters of the war.
Robert Fliedner built stuff, camps for incoming infantry, sewer lines for those camps, tank farms to store gasoline, and he maintained gasoline pump stations that pumped fuel to the front lines.
His overseas duty started in England, then landing at Normandy's Utah Beach, and it ended more than two years later at Bataan in the Pacific.
Please welcome Robert Fliedner of College Station, one of those rare World War II veterans who served on both fronts.
Robert, it's a pleasure to have you on Veterans of the Valley and to tell your story here.
You're a New Jersey guy.
You graduated from high school in 1940, I know.
That's correct.
But you tried to enlist, but they just said you couldn't see well enough, right?
That's right.
That was my problem.
I wore glasses and had...
what they considered to be too poor eyesight.
So they said, thanks, but no thanks.
But then you were drafted in 1943.
1941, December, Pearl Harbor.
What do you remember about hearing the news?
Where were you?
I was in the living room of my parents' home, and it was mid-afternoon, and I was going to go out with some of my buddies, and all of a sudden, they broke into the program to announce the news at Pearl Harbor.
And, of course, we were stunned.
None of us really realized how it would affect our lives.
1943, though, you were drafted.
You went to Fort Dix initially and then to Fort Niagara, where all the people there were pretty much limited service like yourself.
That's right.
And at that time, limited service meant that you were going to stay in your army area, which was at that time centered around New York City.
Right.
They just tried to find something for you to do.
You were a draftsman.
That's right.
That was your training at the time.
So they were looking for something to go along with your training.
Correct.
Right, right.
But then they decided to reassign that post up in Niagara, and they decided that they were going to re-evaluate all of you and decide whether to kick you out of the Army or to make you general service, right?
That's the way it worked.
I don't know anyone that got kicked out.
We all magically passed the physical.
There was a war going on, so you passed the physical, and then you were a general.
You went to Camp Ellis, 368th General Service Engineering, and that was construction is what that was all about because your MOS was as a draftsman, so that kind of went hand in hand, right?
That suited their needs at that time.
Right.
You learned how to shoot a .50 caliber machine gun, right?
For no reason at all.
That was the only Army school I ever went to.
All the rest of it was on-the-job training.
That's right.
And you went to that school, what, up near Chicago?
Near Chicago, right.
Right.
And that's the only time you ever came in contact with a .50 caliber.
Yeah.
From there on in, I never saw it or never handled it again.
Right.
Went on to Camp Shanks.
And then we're pretty soon going to go over to Europe and they gave you a 24 hour pass to say goodbye to your family.
What do you remember about that?
Well, I can remember getting home and I had not told my parents what was going on.
And of course, they were kind of shocked and of course, then delighted to see me.
But they realized that
I was going someplace.
And of course, I don't know what thoughts my dad had because he served in France in the AAF in World War I. So I can imagine or try to imagine some of his thoughts and visions.
probably had an idea of where his son was headed and the perils that his son might come in contact with.
That's right.
Let's talk about going over.
I'm always fascinated by the stories because it seems like every soldier who went to the European theater has some sort of a story about their trip over.
And you were on the British boat called the Scythia.
Correct.
Talk about that trip over from New York, right?
It was loaded from
keel to open decks with soldiers.
In fact, where I was billeted was five decks down.
We were below the waterline.
But there were two open decks that had soldiers on them the whole trip.
And they never came in.
So it was quite an experience.
Fortunately, we didn't meet any really rough weather.
But I know my own experience was...
First three days, I didn't feel too well, but we got over it.
When you're talking about packed in, you're talking about really packed in.
You told me about sort of sleeping in a makeshift hammock.
For a couple of nights, I tried sleeping in a hammock slung from the ceiling, and I could reach out and touch eight other men.
And every spot on the tables we ate off of, underneath the tables, every inch was covered with a body.
But we're going to find out later on exactly how resourceful Robert Fliedner was.
So you eventually found your way up to the open air deck, right?
Because things were getting kind of nasty down there.
They were a little bit on the smelly side.
That many men together and not many latrines and all that.
It can be that way.
Only one.
And by the time morning would come, there were several inches of water slopping around in it.
Right.
You were a 19-year-old kid now, a 19 or 20-year-old kid who hadn't been away from home very much.
But what were your thoughts?
I mean, you're heading off to war.
Were you afraid?
No, I don't think I was afraid.
You didn't know what tomorrow would bring.
you were in a group that everybody was the same.
Right.
Everybody literally in the same boat.
That's right.
For 12 days, you went over, you landed at Bristol, England.
And then to sort of take us from there after your landing, they transferred you.
After Bristol, they took us up to a small English town called Buxton.
And we were housed in what they call the townhouses up there.
and our task was to build this camp for the infantry coming over months and months later for the invasion.
Of course we really weren't aware of that at the time.
So we often call ourselves the strong back, weak mind division.
I worked initially on a concrete gang where we were
pouring floors for some of the buildings that we would erect and then I was assigned the task of putting in a sewer line to a stream that was about 2,500 feet long and we had a digger that was going to dig the trench for us but we hit a Roman drain
And that broke the teeth of the digger.
Because there were only one company of engineers there, and the infantry arrived.
So every morning I would get a platoon of infantrymen, and it was up to me to put them to work.
Their non-coms disappeared.
And so after the digger broke down,
We had about a thousand feet of trench to go, and so I gave them a choice.
Pick a shovel, fellas.
Here we go.
And this was a trench that had to be big enough to set down the piping.
Yeah, we were using clay tile, bell clay tile, which was...
a common product in England at that time.
And because water would get in the trench, we would have to do it in sections.
We'd build like a earthen dam and then we could pump the water out and lay the tile
And then move on to the next section.
Right.
Just leapfrog that way.
Exactly.
And this camp you were building, I think you said this was for infantry, new infantry that was coming over from the states.
That's right.
Who were going to be involved in the initial invasion of Normandy.
Yeah.
From there, you were taken up into the Welch Mountains.
What was that about?
Well, as D-Day got close, we were taken up.
work on the camp stopped and we were taken up into the Welsh mountains to do some refresher training which consisted of marching and at that time they took away our M1 Garands and gave us battle salvage M1 carbines and mine was a mess when they put us out on the target range
I never did find out where it was hitting.
It never hit the target.
So, of course, at that time, I swore to myself that if I had to, the first chance I'd get, I would exchange it for a grand.
Right, right, right.
It was about this time, I guess, that D-Day actually occurred, but you really didn't know about it yet because you were up in the mountains.
You were pretty much in the boondocks, right?
That's right.
We were in the boondocks, and we probably didn't hear about it for a couple of days.
D-Day was June 6th.
Within a few days, however, they moved us down to a camp, a barbed wire enclosure,
on the southern coast of England and we were there just a few days until they loaded us on a LST.
Us as troops and of course with our bulldozers and road scrapers and trucks, all the heavy equipment that we had went with us.
I want to go back to this encampment that you said, this barbed wire encampment where they held you.
There's a lot of security involved in this time.
One reason that it was a barbed wire encampment is they didn't want you communicating with the outside because people kind of knew what the war strategy was then.
Yeah, right.
They wanted to break any communication between the troops and outside because you never knew who was on the outside.
I mean, there were German agents
in England and any information they could glean that could be useful.
I want you to, if you can, talk in as much detail as you can remember about the trip over.
You said you left from Weymouth, England, which was on the south border of England.
Southern coast, right.
Southern coast of England on an LST, which was one of the tank transport landing ship, landing ship tank.
That's the type of ship that has two huge doors that can be opened and a ramp drops so that heavy equipment
tanks or that can drive off onto the land. What was, sort of recreate what it was like. In this where did you sleep? Where did you what did you do when you weren't asleep? You were surrounded... It was only a 12-hour trip right for us. Right. And we were we boarded about dusk. I see. So that meant we all tried to find a place where we could lie down. Exactly. Some of the fellows found out that the uh
canvas top of a two and a half ton truck made a nice hammock.
And so they climbed up there and went to sleep.
What they didn't realize was that that truck was parked right at the rail.
And if they'd have made the wrong move, they'd have been in the drink.
That's right.
And nobody probably would have missed them.
So in this LST, there was equipment, there was trucks, and there were soldiers.
That's right.
It was packed.
It was pretty crowded.
They utilized every square foot that they could.
Right, right.
When you, did you have a notion at the time of what you were going to find when you got to the beach?
You knew that it had been
what, anywhere from 10 days to two weeks since the invasion.
Or less.
Right.
But at the time, when you were about to land at Utah Beach, did you all have any idea what you were going to find, whether there'd still be resistance going on or whatever?
We had no idea of what we might run into or expect.
As it turns out, the front was probably, by that time, maybe 20 miles in.
Mm-hmm.
And...
the LST ran up on the beach but didn't get up quite far enough.
So we waited for the tide to change, back off, ran up again.
And this time we got off.
And we climbed up out of the LST and across the beach and up a road that had been cut in by
other engineers and we were in an assembly area and some of the fellows went out to explore much to their later regret because they came back and said they had found some German bodies.
The CO had them say well take me there and show me and after he viewed them he told them now you bury them.
So, but then we marched that night and got to what turned out to be an open field.
It was raining and they said, well, pitch your pup tents and we'll stay here tonight and then we'll see where we go tomorrow.
It was raining and it was dark.
Pitch black. You were you were somewhere in France and and with after having marched right for quite a while. A couple hours. For a couple of hours. Right. That's right. Um and you built a tent city. Trucks that was just picked you up took you further inland where you built a tent. Right that was our first assignment was to build this tent city for some headquarters. I don't know what headquarters and
After that transpired, we completed that task.
We got picked up and we were assigned then to the military pipeline.
Right.
I want to talk about that because it's a fascinating part of what your duty was.
These were fuel pipelines that actually...
Will you tell us exactly what the pipelines were, sort of describe how it looked, how far apart they were?
Okay.
The pipeline consisted of three four-inch lines, two of which carried 80 octane gas, one carried 100 octane gas.
The 80 for vehicles, the 100 for tanks and planes.
Right.
The pipeline itself consisted of lengths of steel pipe, each one about 20 feet long, and there was a rubber gasket and couplings.
So it had some flexibility.
If they ran into something that was too abrupt, they would have to use welding torches and cut it and make a special length of pipe.
The pumping stations were located about every five miles, and each station had 12 engines with pumps.
Three engines, four pipes, so about 12 engines.
One group was a spare in reserve in case something happened to
one of the active groups but then they would change off. First my task was to help service and maintain the engines and pumps. And so we would go into a station and we would do one a day being transported from our headquarters to a station and we would shut down one bank at a time putting the reserve one in
until we had run through all of the engines and pumps for that day.
Then we'd go back to headquarters.
Right.
And the next day we would go to another station.
So it was your job to keep them going.
Matter of fact, I found a photograph that's not an exact photograph from Mr. Fliedner's experience, but the pump, as a matter of fact, here it is right now.
This is very similar to the engines that you worked on and the pipes, right?
Right.
They were GMC engines.
I don't know who made the pumps.
Right, right.
So these are, this is quite similar to what you worked on.
You can see the pipes heading up to where the centrifugal pump is located.
The engines in the forward or left side of that view.
Right.
So that gives you kind of an idea of what your job was, was to maintain those and to keep those
oiled and running and the spark plugs going and everything to where it could all work, right?
That's right.
But at first, you told me that every day you'd go to the one that was five miles out, then you'd come back.
Then you'd go to the one 10 miles out, then 15 and 20.
But they finally figured out that they could be more efficient than that, right?
Right.
They decided that, hey, we're spending a lot of time in traveling.
So they assigned a mechanic
to stay permanently at each pumping station.
And that was his then sole responsibility to maintain those engines and pumps.
And that worked out very well.
And I was fortunate in the one that I got assigned to.
It was near where the Germans had constructed some barrack-like buildings with prefabricated panels.
And my predecessor there had built a little hut, which I occupied.
which was probably very, very good accommodations.
And I used, I like to read, so I used either candles or
piece of rope and a bottle of gasoline for light until I got smart one day.
Yeah, tell us about this.
And I found a French car that had been hit at a railroad crossing.
So I salvaged the battery and one of the headlights and rigged that up, and that became a reading lamp for me.
And when the battery would start getting low, I'd take it out, put it on one of the engines, take that one, which was fully charged, and bring it back.
Your resourcefulness goes on, as a matter of fact, a little later on, another story that I want you to tell, but the war was in front of you at this time.
You were not in resistance right now, but what you were doing was making sure that this pipeline was pumping the gasoline necessary to the front to run the tanks, to fuel the aircraft.
So, I mean, what you were doing was not just extremely essential to the war, it made it possible to fight the war.
Yes, because after all, the Army
really was mechanized and dependent upon vehicles. Right right. For every everything. Right right so if your pipeline broke down there would be problems. Now you had a commander who uh decided that he wouldn't be much of a commander unless he got his guys a little bit closer to the front and he was going to take some of them to the front and leave some of them back but. Yes our our regimental colonel
I'm sure he was old army and I'm sure he figured this was his last hurrah.
So he realized that if he wanted to earn a star, he had to be up close to the front.
So he made a deal where he would leave just a handful of men to train new engineers coming from the States.
And he would take then the bulk of his men up.
They wound up, I believe in Belgium.
and I was one of the ones selected to stay behind and train newcomers.
I guess the reason for that being that I had run a small two-tank farm outside of Saint-Lo and of course I had been on the engines and pumps and knew how they worked.
So I was on detached duty with these new fellows and eventually
I became cadre for a new outfit that was formed in the theater.
And my assignment then was to become a pumping station foreman.
And I might see an officer once a week for a few minutes.
My other contact was by telephone to our company headquarters.
Right.
You describe yourself as you were not a yes man.
You told people what you think, even if it got you in trouble sometimes.
And it did get me in trouble, both during service and later on in life, in civilian life.
But you got promoted.
You got promoted to staff sergeant.
You got a rocker underneath you.
I never was a PFC.
I went from private to buck corporal and from buck corporal to staff.
Talk about your resourcefulness. You told me a story about how you created a hot shower for people. Right there was a spring located above us on a hill and we dammed up the spring and ran some pipe down we built a shack and we rigged a stove so that we could heat water so we had hot showers for our guys.
I've got to move on, but there's another story that we can't really get into about how you were able to acquire a generator from a German tank and literally create an electric plant and almost light up a city yourself, or light up a tent city.
We lighted up our five tents, that's for sure, and that was a big boon.
Right.
The war ended in Europe.
Excuse me, the war ended in Europe and the pipeline shut down.
And now it's June of 1945 and you're off to the Pacific.
We've got about five minutes left, but let's talk about that trip.
You left from Marseille.
We were taken from near Saint-Laurent up to Paris and put on 40 and 8s.
And believe me, that was probably the most comfortable trip I ever had.
Right, those were Mott's car.
Right, this famous 40 and 8s from World War I.
We went down to Marseille.
We were in a camp there a couple of days when we were loaded on ship.
And, of course, we didn't know our destination, but it turned out to be that we sailed the Mediterranean through the Straits of Gibraltar, across the South Atlantic, through the Panama Canal, and all the way across the Pacific, following almost the equator in...
Well, part of that trip was in July.
The heat was unbearable.
You couldn't almost walk on the steel decks of the boat.
Wow.
And we wound up eventually in Manila, and there we went out on Bataan.
This was a 30-day trip.
30-day trip.
30-day trip in another packed boat.
That was an APA.
Yeah.
Supposedly, the fellow, the sailors on board said they had doubled the air conditioning.
Well, if they did, we didn't realize it because it was hot.
It was.
So you landed in Manila in July, and your assignment then was to build a tank farm to store gasoline in tanks.
Right.
Our assignment was to go out...
And it turned out we were down on the Batan Peninsula building this tank farm.
And then, of course, we received the news about the atom bomb and Japan surrendering.
And all of us breathed a sigh of relief because we were not looking forward to invading the homeland.
Right.
Everybody knew what you were there for.
You were there to prepare for an invasion of Japan.
That's right.
Which would have been a whole different kind of conflict.
Correct.
I think as everybody knows.
It would have been a real bloodbath.
Indeed, which everybody would have been involved in.
the bombs were dropped, the peace was signed, and you were offered to stay, to re-up for four years as part of an occupational army.
Correct.
And you said, okay, if I can go home.
Yes, because in all of my experience, which was now over two years overseas, I'd had one three-day pass.
I'd never had a furlough.
And I thought that that was something I wanted before I went to a,
another foreign land and stayed there for years.
They said they couldn't manage that and because of my service in Europe I had the points under the point system and I just thought well then just send me home period.
And you went home in 1945 as a matter of fact you
They sent you to Seattle, then you took the train all the way to New Jersey, and I think you ended up being in New Jersey about on Christmas Day.
So it was a nice Christmas surprise for your family.
We arrived in Fort Monmouth, New Jersey, Christmas Day morning.
On 1945.
There's so much more to your story, and we are out of time now, but thank you for your service.
And it's a great, unique story of serving on both fronts.
Well, it was, I guess, one of the great experiences of my life.
Thank you, sir, for your service, Robert.
Most European theater veterans of World War II were supposed to go to the Pacific Theater after VA Day.
But as you just heard, most never got there because of the bombs at Hiroshima and Nagasaki ending the war.
Robert Fliedner, though, was one of those rare soldiers who saw the two different conflicts firsthand.
His is a remarkable story of service on both sides of the globe.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
[Silence.]
[Music.]